---
layout: post
title:  "apply"
date:   2017-11-20 20:59:18
categories:
excerpt:
tags:
  -
---

Lately I've been looking for ways to make complicated Scala code easier to read.  One way I have found to do this is with custom types.  Custom types are especially useful when dealing with a complicated business domain.

Here's a quick & contrived example of what I mean:

{% highlight scala %}
sealed trait GameOutcome
case object Won extends GameOutcome
case object Lost extends GameOutcome

case class Player(name: String)
case class Score(amount: Int)
case class Game(player: Player, score: Score)
case class GameHistory(value: Map[GameOutcome, List[Game]])

val p1 = Player("player1")

val s1 = Score(10)
val s2 = Score(20)
val s3 = Score(30)

val g1 = Game(p1, s1)
val g2 = Game(p1, s2)
val g3 = Game(p1, s3)

val gameHistory = GameHistory(Map(Won -> List(g1, g2), Lost -> List(g3)))
{% endhighlight %}

What's the point here?  `GameHistory` is just a wrapper around a `Map`?  Why are we wrapping simple Scala primitives in excessive case classes?

The point here is to achieve simplicity and avoid complexity.  I personally think that custom types are a way to achieve that - the reader can observe the Types in play and then not have to wonder about the concepts behind the primitives.  

 For example, let's add some methods to our `GameHistory`, playing with Scala's `apply` concept where a function/method is *applied* to a parameter value, and also lets extend the standard `++` [operator from the underlying `Map` class](https://www.scala-lang.org/api/current/scala/collection/Map.html#++(xs:Traversable[(K,V)]):scala.collection.Map[K,V]).

{% highlight scala %}
case class GameHistory(value: Map[GameOutcome, List[Game]]) {
  // hack to get at the value of the GameHistory cleanly
  def apply(): Map[GameOutcome, List[Game]] = value
  // use the native Map functionality to get at the value without extra code, i.e gameHistory.value(x)
  def apply(x: GameOutcome): List[Game] = value(x)
  // use our new "paramater-less" apply method to combine two maps
  def ++(x: GameHistory): GameHistory = new GameHistory(value ++ x())
}

val gameHistory = GameHistory(Map(Won -> List(g1, g2)))
val moreHistory = GameHistory(Map(Lost -> List(g3)))
val combinedGameHistory = gameHistory ++ moreHistory

combinedGameHistory()
// Map(
//  Won -> List(Game(Player("player1"), Score(10)), Game(Player("player1"), Score(20))),
//  Lost -> List(Game(Player("player1"), Score(30)))
// )

combinedGameHistory(Won)
// List(Game(Player("player1"), Score(10)), Game(Player("player1"), Score(20)))
{% endhighlight %}

This can be dangerous however, and introduce too much complexity and convulsion.  I have to remember to be careful and use this technique only when it actually is [the simplest way to solve a problem](/teachers/2017/11/12/plain-functional-programming-by-martin-odersky.html)
