---
layout: post
title:  "awk"
date:   2017-03-08 20:52:54
categories: tools
excerpt: "processing text with awk"
tags:
  - bash
  - awk
---

AWK is a standard command line tool for processing text.  It is available on Unix-based systems like Linux and Mac OS X.

The strange name is simply an acronym of the three creators' initials.

AWK fills a cool niche where bash builtins like `grep` and `sed` have some limitations.

For example, it can be tricky to process text output that is separated by whitespace such as tabs.  I have encountered differences writing scripts which run differently on Linux and Mac systems using the same bash commands (due to the GNU vs. BSD lineage).

AWK is a great tool to overcome this type of OS discrepancy.  For example, if you use docker you know `docker images` prints a whitespace-separated list of all your local images, [with the image ID being in the 3rd column](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/images/#examples).

This nifty script will search the `docker images` output against a user-provided string.    `awk '{print $3}'` will output the image IDs only, and that output is piped into `docker rmi` remove the images.

This task sounds simple but it might prove tricky using standard bash tools like `grep`, `sed` and `tr` when running on different OS's and dealing with whitespace-separated content.

{% highlight bash %}
IMAGE_NAME="your_image_name_here"
docker images | grep --color=never "$IMAGE_NAME" | awk '{print $3}' | xargs docker rmi -f
{% endhighlight %}
